Very initial draft of dm-db (#309)
krlmlr/dm: vignettes/wip/dm-db.Rmd

my_dm
``````

The components of the my_dm object are lazy tables powered by {[dbplyr](https://dbplyr.tidyverse.org/)}.
{dbplyr} translates the {[dplyr](https://dplyr.tidyverse.org/)} grammar of data manipulation into queries the database server understands.
Lazy tables defer downloading of table data until results are collected for printing or local processing.

## Building a dm from tables

A dm can also be constructed from individual tables or views.

> This is useful for when you want to work with a subset of a database's tables or you want to build a database out of tables from different sources.

Reviewer: We don't currently support combining tables from multiple sources in a single dm.

```suggestion
This is useful for when you want to work with a subset of a database's tables, perhaps from different schemas.
```

my_manual_dm
``````

## Define Primary and Foreign Keys

Primary and Foreign Keys are how relational database tables are linked with each other.

> A primary key is a column (or sometimes a combination of columns) that has a unique value for each row within a table.
> A foreign key is a column (or sometimes a combination of columns) containing the primary key for a row in another table.

Reviewer: We're working on support for compound keys, they should get a separate short vignette later. Maybe a footnote?

```suggestion
A primary key is a column that has a unique value for each row within a table.
A foreign key is a column containing the primary key for a row in another table.[^compound]

[^compound]: Support for compound keys (consisting of multiple columns) is [planned](https://github.com/krlmlr/dm/issues/3).
```

Foreign keys act as cross references between tables.
They specify the relationships that gives us the *relational* database.

The [model diagram](https://relational.fit.cvut.cz/assets/img/datasets-generated/financial.svg) provided by our test database loosely illustrates the intended relationships between tables.
In the diagram we can see that the loans table should be linked to the accounts table.
Below we create those links in 3 steps:

1. Add a primary key `id` to the accounts table
1. Add a primary key `id` to the loans table
1. Add a foreign key `account_id` to the loans table referencing the accounts table

Then we assign colors to the tables and draw the structure of the dm.

Note that when the foreign key is created the primary key in the referenced table does not need to be specified, but this does require primary keys to be defined first.

> And, as mentioned above, primary and foreign key constraints on the database are currently only imported for Postgres and SQL Server databases.

Reviewer: Also, they are only imported with `dm_from_source()`, never with `dm()`.

  dm_add_tbl(trans)
``````

> For tables from other sources or the local environment `[copy_to()](missing_link)` from the {dplyr} package is used.

Reviewer: Style/grammar question: does the additional "from" help or hurt the sentence?

Code will be auto-linked on the website.

```suggestion
For tables from other sources or from the local environment `dplyr::copy_to()` is used.
```

my_dm_trans
``````

And, like {dbplyr}, results are never written to a database unless explicitly requested.

> #ASK KIRILL - what exactly is happening here

Reviewer: "flatten" is an operation that starts with a table and brings in all immediately related tables with a join. The operation returns a (lazy) table. The `sql_render()` prints the SQL generated for that operation.

We don't really need to show `sql_render()` if it complicates things. The "lazy table" nature is visible in the output too.

Does that help?

  sql_render()
``````

## Performing operations on tables by "zooming"

As the dm is a collection of tables, if we wish to perform operations on an individual table we set it as the context for those operations using `dm_zoom_to()`.

> 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
See `vignette("dm-zoom-to-table", package = "dm")` for more detail on zooming.

```

> Since dm operations are transient unless explicitly requested, our chain of manipulations on the selected table are made permanent by copying it into a new table at completion with `dm_insert_zoomed()`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Since dm operations are transient unless explicitly requested, our chain of manipulations on the selected table are made permanent by assigning the result of `dm_insert_zoomed()` to a new object, `my_dm_total`.
This is a new dm object, derived from the original, with a new lazy table `total_loans` linked to the `accounts` table.
The subsequent section describes how to materialize the results on the database.
```

## Persisting results

After adding columns to link tables or calculating summaries of data, we might want these changes to the database to persist. 

> #FIXME - if compute stores results in temporary tables, how are they made permanent or inserted into the database itself?

Reviewer: `temporary = FALSE` and specify a name?

> To force a dm to execute the SQL query generated by the operations it has performed, we use the `compute()` function, originally implemented in {dbplyr}, but reimplimented in {dm} to provide the same functionality.

Reviewer: The generic is provided by {dbplyr}, the {dm} package implements methods for dm and zoomed_dm objects. Here we can perhaps simplify:

```suggestion
To force a dm to execute the SQL query generated by the operations it has performed, we call the `dbplyr::compute()` method on the dm object.
```

#FIXME - what's the right language here? inherited? carried over from?

`compute()` forces the computation of a query, in this case the query or multiple queries created by the dm to represent all operations that have been performed but not yet evaluated.
The results are stored in temporary tables on the database server.
Calling `compute()` requires write access, otherwise an error is returned.

relational.fit.cvut.cz does not allow write access. 

> As a workaround to demonstrate the usage of `compute()`, we will copy our dm into a local SQLite database and move forward with that as the source of our dm.

Reviewer: I forgot to mention, we now can

```r
my_dm_sqlite <- dm_financial_sqlite()
```

Do we still need it? Maybe discuss `copy_dm_to()` at the end with an example?

my_dm_local$total_loans
``````

There is a third {dbplyr} verb that has not yet been implemented. `collapse()` forces generation of the SQL query instead of computation ([#304](https://github.com/krlmlr/dm/issues/304)).

`compute()` also works for a zoomed dm.
Calling it during a chain of operations will execute all relevant SQL queries up to that point.
Operations after the `compute()` will use the generated results.

> #FIXME - is this true? Is this what is happening?

Reviewer: Yes.

```suggestion
```

Reviewer: `?compute.tbl_sql`

## Deploying a dm to a database

To deploy a dm we must copy it to a DBMS.
This is done using the method `copy_dm_to()`, which is used behind the scenes by our `dm_financial_sqlite()` function, the code for which appears below.

```{r}

> dm_financial_sqlite <- function() {
>   stopifnot(rlang::is_installed("RSQLite"))
> 
>   my_dm <-
>     # FIXME
>     # should this be dm_financial()?
>     dm_financial_sqlite() %>%
>     # we remove the trans table from the dm due to its size
>     dm_select_tbl(-trans)
> 
>   sqlite_db <- DBI::dbConnect(RSQLite::SQLite())
>   sqlite_dm <- copy_dm_to(sqlite_db, my_dm, temporary = FALSE)
> 
>   sqlite_dm
> }

Reviewer: A simpler way to show the code of a function:

```suggestion
dm_financial_sqlite
```

```

> As demonstrated, `copy_dm_to()` takes as arguments a destination, a {DBI} connection, the dm we wish to deploy, and here the `temporary` argument set to FALSE as this is a deployment and we want it to be permanent.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
As demonstrated, `copy_dm_to()` takes as arguments a destination, a {DBI} connection, the dm we wish to deploy, and here the `temporary` argument set to `FALSE` as this is a deployment and we want it to be permanent.
```
